FDA Food Safety Modernization Act of 2011 answer: shifted focus from responding to preventing food contamination

Foodborne Illness symptoms answer: diarrhea, nausea, cramping, vomiting
-very young/old and immunocomp. vulnerable

Biological Hazards in Food answer: organic or living organisms or its properties that can cause an adverse response in humans
-causes 90% of foodborne illnesses

Infection answer: invasion of the body by a pathogenic organism
-Listeria Monocytogenes

Intoxication-Poisoning answer: caused by bacteria growing on food and releasing toxins that cause the illness
-food has already been contaminated
-Clostridium Bofulinum

Toxin-Mediated Infection answer: caused by consuming microorganisms that produce toxins in stomach or intestines
-E-coli

Molds answer: produce mytotoxins
visible-forms blooms
should not be eaten

Viruses answer: need living cells to multiply
hepatitis A: food contamin w/ fecal matter - shellfish
Noravirus(stomach flu)

Parasites answer: needs host to survive-uncommon in US
inactivation in food with cooking and gamma irradiation

Roundworms answer: trichinella spiralis: undercooked pork
herring worms/cod worms: undercooked/raw fish

Protozoa answer: giardia lamblia: common contaminated water
toxoplasma gondii: raw meat

Prions answer: infectious protein particles that do not have DNA or RNA; travel through spinal cord to brain
-mad cow disease

Chemical Hazards in Food answer: cleaners, pesticides, medications or any dangerous chemicals that can get into food

Melamine answer: food adulteration used in fabric, glues, and resins
-imported pet food and infant formula to give falsely elevated protein content (2007)

Acrylamide answer: potential carcinogen that forms when meats, vegetables, and baked products reach extremely high temperatures

Seafood Toxins answer: histamine: fish poisoning from not chilling after catch
mercury poisoning: bioaccumulation can result in excess levels that harm body

Physical Hazards in Food answer: foreign items in food supply

Food Allergy answer: a response by your immune system to the proteins in certain foods

Food Intolerance answer: a negative reaction to food that doesn't involve the immune system due to enzyme deficiency

Preventing Foodborne Illness answer: foods should be cooked thoroughly to kill microbes
leftovers should be stored in the refrigerator for a limited period of time
food should be thawed slowly in the refrigerator
when shopping, purchase refrigerated and frozen foods last

Food Preservation answer: increasing the shelf life of foods by preventing the growth and activities of microorganisms
-limiting available water with physical and chemical methods

Biological Spoilage answer: bacteria, yeasts, and molds

Enzymatic Spoilage answer: proteins that catalyze chemical rxns
-proteases, lipases, carbohydrases, polyphenol oxidase

Physical Spoilage answer: type of food spoilage caused by temperature changes, moisture, and dryness
-evaporation and seperation

Drying answer: Food Preservation Method
inhibits micro-organism growth/removal of water
-sun-drying, conventional, vacuum, osmotic, freeze-drying

Curing answer: Food Preservation Method
high concentration of solutes draws water out of food

Fermentation answer: Food Preservation Method
micro-organisms convert sugar to alcohol, gases, acids
-cannot survive in acidic or alcoholic environment

Pickling answer: Food Preservation Method
preserves food through acidification--controls microbial growth
-vinegar often used

Canning answer: Food Preservation Method
packing food and liquid in small container; air left at top for headspace and to ensure vacuum seal
-heating needed for low acid foods by removing oxygen

Cold Preservation answer: refrigeration and freezing

Freezer Burn answer: moisture loss caused by improper packaging or overly long storage in the freezer

Cell-Rupturing answer: water expands upon freezing; large crystals can rupture food's cell walls causing inferior texture

Fluid Loss answer: meat loses water when thawed resulting in a drier texture

Recrystallization answer: from melting to refreezing as larger crystals
-occurs with temperature fluctuation

Heat Preservation answer: boiling, pasteurization, ohmic heating

Boiling answer: 10 minutes inactivates most micro-organisms

Ohmic Heating answer: an electrical current is passed through food, generating enough heat to destroy microorganisms.

Pasteurization answer: treating a substance with heat to kill or slow the growth of pathogens
-high temp short time: 161F for 15 sec
-ultra high temp: >280F for 2 sec

Irradiation answer: the process of exposing food to high-intensity energy waves to increase shelf life and kill harmful microorganisms

Pulsed Light answer: food exposed to intense, brief flashes of light 
- disrupts bacterial cell membranes but not those of the surrounding foods: time sensitive 
- damages bacterial DNA

High Pressure Processing (HPP) answer: method used to pasteurize foods by exposing the items to pulses of high pressure, which destroys the microorganisms that are present

Water soluble vitamins most susceptible to answer: loss after cooking in liquid

Milling Flours answer: 1. breaking
2. purifying
3. reducing
4. sifting
5. classifying: determine class

What do whole grain flours include? answer: bran and germ

Wet Milling answer: grains soaked in water to soften seed and make it easier to separate
-corn kernels

Wheat Flour answer: soft: low protein and high starch - cake and pastries
hard: high protein content - breads and pasta

Starch in Flour answer: provides structure, texture, and flavor
contributes to crumb: fine vs. coarse
broken down by amylase into dextrins, maltose, and glucose

Course vs. Fine Crumb answer: large, irregular air holes vs. small dense air bubbles

Whole Wheat Flour answer: high in fiber
low volume: dense and heavy
require refridg. to slow rancidity bc of germ

Common Wheat Flours answer: white: endosperm only
bread: high gluten content: winter wheat
durum: highest protein content: pasta
all purpose: hard and soft wheat
pastry: soft wheat: low protein
cake: lowest protein; fine crumb and delicate

Non Wheat Flours answer: rye: low gluten content; compact breads
-contain water-soluble carbs called pentosans

Triticale answer: hybrid of wheat and rye grains

Gluten Free Flours answer: amaranth: nutty
buckwheat: pancake and waffles
cornmeal: major protein is corn; crumbly 
rice: popular in asian culture

Bleached Flour answer: artificial agents whiten via oxidation
-unbleached has yellow tinge
-increases number of disulfide bonds which increases protein strength and elasticity

Aged Flour answer: naturally bleached by oxygen in air
-expensive

Phosphated Flour answer: leavened with baking soda rather than baking powder because acid— monocalcium phosphate is added

Self-Rising Flour answer: all-purpose flour with added leavening agents(baking powder) and salt

What role do dextrins have in cooked flour products? answer: sweetens

Protein function in Flour answer: contribute to structure and ability to rise
-wheat flour preferred for baking bc of high concentration of protein

What happens when water is mixed with flour? answer: glutenin and gliadin combine to form elastic network of gluten

Gluten function in flour answer: gliadin: stickiness
glutenin: elasticity

What produces CO2 in bread? answer: yeast and leavening agents

What does kneading bread do? answer: entraps air bubbles and stretches the gluten

What does baking bread do? answer: steam and expanding gases cause gluten to expand further and also cause gelatinization and protein coagulation: sets structure

Gluten Formation answer: 1. hydration
2. kneading

Cereal Grain Allergies answer: 1. bakers asthma: inhalation
2. from ingestion
both trigger immune system

Celiac Disease answer: autoimmune disease
enhances recognition of gliadins by immune cells leading to inflammation

FDA Labeling Gluten Free answer: contain less than 20 ppm gluten

Leaving agents in flour mixtures answer: yeast, bacteria, baking soda, baking powder

Proofing answer: dough left to sit in warm environment as CO2 is generated

Bakers Yeast answer: dry/active yeast
fresh yeast
instant yeast

Why does sourdough taste sour? answer: lactic acid fermentation
-bacteria ferments carbs to CO2

Leaving Agents and Defects answer: too much=product will fall and have low volume
soapy taste 
too little=dense heavy product

Sugar function in Flour Mixtures answer: increase volume, provide food for fermentation, delay gelatinization, increase moistness, brown crusts

Salt function in Flour Mixtures answer: controls yeast growth; flavor
too much=inhibits yeast activity and decreases volume
strengthens gluten network

Liquid function in Flour Mixtures answer: hydrates flour to gelatinize starch
acts as solvent for dry ingredients
activates yeast: provides steam for leavening

Milk in Flour Mixtures answer: contributes to maillard browning; more fat=creamier

Fat in Flour Mixtures answer: interferes with gluten development by lubricating dough; increases volume with sugar
finer crumb and tender texture
more fat=shorter gluten strands: shortening 
creates flakiness

Egg in Flour Mixtures answer: proteins contribute to structure and maillard browning
emulsify mixtures

Quick Breads answer: baked immediately after ingredients mixed
-no waiting for yeast action to rise
-leavened with air, steam or CO2, baking soda or powder

Pour Batters answer: quick bread 
1. pancakes
2. crepes: needs starch moisture
3. waffles: more fat=oily and rich 
4. popovers: thinnest batter

Additions in Pancake answer: refined flour=fluffier
egg=tougher more protein
buttermilk: holds more air from curlded batter

Drop Batters answer: quick bread
1. muffins: course crumb; less gluten production
- bottoms of cups should be grease, un greased sides allow higher rising 

2. boston brown bread: rye and graham flours 
3. corn bread
4. hushpuppies: stone-ground cornmeal 
5. dumplings: chewy gel
6. tea breads
7. coffee cakes

What happens when you over mix drop batters? answer: peaked-top with tough interior that is riddled with tunnels
dense and heavy product

How can tunnel formation be reduced? answer: using whole grain flours

What happens when you under mix drop batters? answer: gluten development insufficient
crumbly muffin 
low volume

Additives in Quick Breads answer: preservatives: inhibit mold growth from sugar
sweeteners: sucrose, corn syrup
emulsifiers: help ingredients mix well: eggs

Why are preservatives added as a calcium or sodium salt? answer: they will dissolve in the food

Rye Flour answer: low gluten content than wheat; compact breads
high fiber

Dumplings answer: small ball of flour batter: tan/white color 
-simmered in water, stock, etc.
-strong dough needed for steaming
-white starch source that sticks and seals

Doughs answer: unleavened breads
-easy to prepare
leavened by steam 
1. tortillas: flour or corn; soft vs. tough 
2. chapatis: Indian
3. matzo
4. biscuits: rely on fat with brief kneading to increase gluten: ice water used to keep butter intact 
5. scones: richer than biscuits

Saccharomyces cerevisiae answer: yeast
multiplies rapidly at optimum temp and moisture content

Straight Dough Method answer: a mixing method for yeast breads in which all ingredients are simply combined and mixed at same time

Sponge Method answer: mixing method for yeast breads in which yeast is combined with water and 1/3 flour to ferment for 40-60min

Batter Method answer: mixing method for yeast breads where ingredients are combined then beaten to develop gluten 
-hot dog and hamburger buns

Rapid Mix answer: mixing method for yeast breads where use of bread-making machine is utilized 
-bakes and rises in same pan

When is dough finished being kneaded? answer: whenever the dough springs back when pressed or appears translucent "gluten window" when stretched

Second Proofing answer: doubles its size; greater volume and texture
-evens out temp, smaller air bubbles, redistributes products

How does humidity play into yeast bread? answer: if humidity is too low, crust will crack

Overfermentation answer: overextension of gluten and cell structure collapse=low volume 
-sour flavor from acid production

Pan of choice for bread shaping? answer: dark heavy-weight steel pan 
-promotes golden brown color and crust

Baking Yeast Breads answer: typically 45min; high temp 400 until last 10-15min lowered to 350
-contributes to oven spring: expansion of dough during initial baking

Changes during Yeast Bread Baking answer: yeast killed
enzymes inactivated
alcohol from fermentation vaporized
proteins coagulate
starches gelatinize
caramelization
starch broken down into dextrins (dextrinization) 
maillard reaction: eggs, milk, sugar substrate

What causes even distribution of CO2 in Yeast Breads? answer: mixing, kneading, punching down, and shaping the dough
-gives best crumb

Types of Yeast Breads answer: white breads
whole-wheat breads
sourdough breads
rolls
pita bread

Specialty Breads differ in terms of answer: 1. preparation technique 
2. variations in ingredients

Staling answer: crust toughens, crumb becomes less elastic/more firm, loss of moisture & flavor as soon as it leaves the oven
-reversible upon reheating, appears back when cooled
due to starch retrogradation

Sucrose answer: table sugar (glucose + fructose)
-sugar extraction process

What are the primary sources of sucrose? answer: sugar cane and sugar beets

Functions of Sugar answer: sweetness, texture, browning, fermentation, extending shelf life

What is the only sweetener of animal origin? answer: lactose
-least sweet

Forms of Sucrose answer: raw sugar
turbinado sugar: not truly raw
white sugar
brown sugar

Glucose answer: the form of sugar that circulates in the blood and provides the major source of energy for body tissues. - when its level is low, we feel hunger.

Dextrose answer: another name for glucose; derived from cornstarch breakdown
-less sweet than sucrose

Fructose answer: naturally found in fruits and honey
-sweetest granulated sugar
-most hygroscopic: excessive stickiness and browning
***most soluble

Lactose answer: glucose + galactose; extracted from whey portion of milk 
-used to brown baked products
-levels vary by species
***least soluble

Why is ricotta cheese sweet? answer: high level of lactose from concentrated whey protein

Maltose answer: glucose + glucose; starch from grains converted 
-flavors milkshakes and candy
-important for beer production

Corn Syrup answer: thick, sweet syrup, made from cornstarch and enzymes/acid
boiled, filtered, evaporated
small=sweeter
longer=contribute to viscosity

Dextrose Equivalent (DE) answer: measurement of dextrose concentration. A DE of 50 means the syrup contains 50% dextrose
- high DE= Increase sweetness and lower viscosity 
- low DE= decrease sweetness and higher viscosity

Why is HFCS so heavily used? answer: fructose sweeter than sucrose so less is needed; making it cheaper and easy to transport

Honey answer: color, viscosity, and flavors influenced by flower bees use

Can honey be fed to babies? answer: NO, because not enough bacteria in their gut to protect from bad micro-organisms/bacteria in honey

Molasses answer: highly concentrated sucrose syrup produced from boiling down sugar
-fermented to produce rum

Maple Syrup answer: drastic rise and fall of temps cause the sap to flow
colors range from light amber(fancy) to dark amber(commercial)

Invert Sugar Syrup answer: mixture of glucose and fructose with hydrolysis
-produces soft smooth texture 
products stay moist: hygroscopic 
causes rapid crust coloration

Sugar Alcohols answer: counterparts of specific carbs; found naturally in fruits and veggies and can be synthesized
-bacteria cannot digest so contributes fewer calories 
-function as humectants

Humectants answer: substances that attract water and help retain moisture

Non-Nutritive Sweeteners answer: manufactured sweeteners that provide little or no energy; also called alternative sweeteners
-sweeter than sucrose
-leave aftertaste and resistant to heat

Saccharin answer: sweet n low; bitter aftertaste

Aspartame answer: nutrasweet or equal
should not be consumed by those with PKU
-loses sweetness when exposed to heat

Steviol Glycosides answer: truvia or purevia; extracted from stevia plant
bitter or astringent aftertaste

Neotame answer: 13,000x sweeter than sucrose
-heat stable

Monk Fruit answer: 300x sweeter than sugar; native to Southern China

Advantame answer: 20,000x sweeter than sucrose and heat stable

Functions of Sugars in Food answer: -solubility: mouthfeel and texture
-crystallization: candy manufacturing, maillard rxn, reducing sugar and protein
-caramelization: browning, less sweet and more flavorful
-moisture absorption: moisture and texture
-fermentation
-preservation: lower water activity; dehydration

What chemical molecule is the most hygroscopic? answer: fructose

Why is amylase important? answer: germination in malt

Functions of Fat answer: 1. act as medium for heat transfer
2. shortening power 
3. emulsions 
4. melting point 
5. plasticity 
6. flavor, texture, appearance, satiety

Fat as Medium for Heat Transfer answer: --high heat = shorter time = optimal
--low heat = longer time = more fat absorption

Fat as Shortening Power answer: solid sat fat: flakey product
oils: crumbly product
cutting in fat: air pockets for flakiness
creaming fat: air bubbles when baked

Fat as Emulsifier answer: oil in water: fat dispersed in water - milk
water in oil: water dispersed in fat - butter

What are the three parts of Emulsions? answer: 1. the dispersed or discontinuous phase
2. the dispersion medium or continuous phase
3. an emulsifier: compound that helps keep one phase dispersed in another (stabilizes)

What does an emulsifier do? answer: migrates to interface between the phases and lowers surface tension between the dispersed and continuous phase
-contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic region
-monoglycerdies and diglycerides

What are an emulsions capacities to resist separation? answer: 1. temporary: least stable (oil and vinegar dressing)
2. semi-permanent: have stabilizers to reduce separation (commercial salad dressings) 
3. permanent: very stable, don't separate (mayo)

Fat Melting Point answer: 1. degree of unsaturation: oils unsaturated and animal fats saturated 
2. length of fatty acids: more C means more interactions and more energy required to break them: longer chain length = higher melting point 
3. cis vs. trans configuration 
4. crystalline structure: how they are packed

Hydrogenation answer: adds hydrogens to the double bonds of unsaturated fatty acids: become more saturated and solid at room temp

How does the carbon chain length affect melting point? answer: the longer the chain, the higher the melting point 
-more energy required

Unsaturated Fatty Acids with what configuration have a higher melting point? answer: trans configuration because the better the fat molecules can stack against each other, the higher the MP

Crystalline size affects Melting Point by? answer: the larger the crystals, the higher the MP
-nicer packed = stronger = better 
- alpha, beta prime (best), beta
least to most stable 
lowest MP to highest MP

Fat for Plasticity answer: ability of a solid fat to hold its shape but still be moldable/spreadable
-INCREASE with temperature and degree of unsaturation

Spreadable Butter answer: plasticity from hydrogenation to solid and then pumped with air to increase volume

Smoke Point of Fat answer: temperature that an oil can be heated before the appearance of acrolein smoke(bad odor)

Flash Point of Fat answer: temp at which wisps of fire streak the surface of heated fat or oil (600F)

Fire Point of Fat answer: temp at which heated substance bursts into flames and burns for 5 sec (700F)

Frying Fats answer: 100% fat; hydrogenated shortenings or vegetable oils
heat stable: smoke point >420F
little flavor

Why do foods fry best in oil that has been used at least once? answer: oils pick up proteins and sugars from foods 
substrates for the Maillard rxn
eventually foods become too dark and oil must be replaced

Types of Fat answer: 1. butter
2. milk fat
3. margarine 
4. shortening: hydrogenated oil
5. oil

Oil Extraction Methods answer: 1. cold-pressing: usually unrefined
2. expeller-pressing: squeezed at high pressure
3. chemical solvents: chemical removal using non-polar solvent --majority of commercial oils

Unrefined Oils answer: have full flavor of plant
slightly higher nutritional value
have low smoke point, cannot be exposed to high heat
more prone to rancidity

Refined Oils answer: undergo removal of naturally present gums, resins, pigments, etc.
low-aroma and bland flavor
higher smoke point

Olive Oils answer: 1. extra-virgin: highest quality, least acidic, strong flavor
2. virgin: more acidic and less flavor
3. olive oil: blend of virgin and refined olive oil
4. light/extra-light: less color and flavor

Why do some oils crystallize when stored in fridge? answer: some fatty acids have higher MP
-creates cloudiness--winterization used

Winterization answer: removal of high-MP triglycerides to prevent cloudiness at cold temps: commercial salad dressings

Fat Replacers answer: substitutes: fewer kcals, lipid-based
mimetics: mimic sensory and/or physical, carb or protein based

Fat Rancidity answer: breakdown of fats into smaller units yield off flavors and odors
1. hydrolytic: water breaks down large fat molecules into smaller ones
2. oxidative: double bond of unsaturated fatty acid reacts with oxygen to result in two or more shorter molecules

Hydrolytic Rancidity answer: occurs if food is not rid of moisture or from the water found on frozen food to be fried 
catalyzed by lipases and heat: butter stored in fridge

Oxidative Rancidity answer: occurs when food is exposed to oxygen in the air
higher degree of unsaturation increases susceptibility
1. initiation
2. propagation
3. termination

Fat Storage answer: rancidity increases with storage time 
will last longer if refrigerated

What are cakes classified according to? answer: whether they contain fat

Cake: Flour, Milk, and Egg Whites answer: contain proteins that contribute to structure and strength

Cake: Fat, Sugar, and Egg Yolks answer: tenderize the structure
-provide moisture and shorten gluten strands to increase tenderness

Shortened Cakes answer: made with fat and are foamy 
-leavened with baking powder or soda 
-shortens gluten strands
-bundt, butter, carrot, cheesecake, devils food, pound, mooncake

Unshortened Cakes answer: very soft and tender cakes 
-beaten with egg whites
-rely on steam and air from foam to leaven
-gluten expands, moisture, lighter/less dense 
-angel food, boston cream pie, tiramisu, meringue

Chiffon Cake answer: made with fat and egg white foam
extra baking powder required to lift the cake during baking

Using Milk instead of water in baking? answer: whiter, sweeter product 
-softer: richer in fat

Prep for Shortened Cakes answer: dull pan to absorb heat readily 
ungreased sides of pan to let rise 
solid shortening over butter 
do not let batter stand too long: gases escape

How does heat flow during baking? answer: from edge to center

Prep for Unshortened Cakes answer: proper mixing essential 
need to set for a long time 
should spring back when done cooking

Flat Frosting answer: uncooked, has tendency to dry out and crack 
cannot store well bc fresh

Cooked Frosting answer: made with granulated or powdered sugar heated in water with additional ingredients
-buttercream

Ganache answer: -prepared from heated mixture of chopped chocolate and heavy cream
-poured over baked items and eventually hardens

Cookies answer: maintain less liquid and more fat and sugar than cakes 
-little to no gelatinization or gluten formation
-more grainy

Bar Cookies answer: more fluid batter
baked in pan
-brownies, lemon bars

Dropped Cookies answer: dropped from spoon onto cookie sheet
more viscous, less moisture content
contain enough flour to not spread when dropped 
-chocolate chips, meringues, fortune cookies

Pressed Cookies answer: piped from pastry bag or pressed through dies
viscous
-lady fingers, macaroons

Molded Cookies answer: strong/heavy enough to be molded into shapes
-biscotti, pb cookies

Rolled Cookies answer: heavier than molded
rolled and cut into shapes
-sugar cookies, gingerbread, shortbread

Icebox/Refrigerated Cookies answer: same dough as rolled cookies just kept in fridge

Prep of Cookies answer: low or non existent sides of baking sheets allow for better air circulation and even baking

Types of Pastries answer: 1. non-laminated
2. laminated

Non-Laminated Pastry answer: fat is cut into flour mixture
-hot water crust: empanadas
-short crust: tart
-dessert pie
-galette
-main dish pie

Laminated Pastry answer: the arrangement of alternating layers of fat and flour in rolled pastry dough
-more layers = more flakiness 
-fat melts and leaves empty space for steam to lift layers 
-puff pastry, croissants, danish

What are the four basic ingredients of a pastry? answer: flour, fat, liquid, and salt
-eggs and sugar are optional 
-high fat content

What are the leavening agents of a pastry? answer: usually air and steam
-except in: danish, croissants, brioche--use yeast

What do pastry and pie doughs contain more of? answer: they contain more fat than any other baked product
-can contain equal parts fat and flour

Prep of Pastry answer: pastry flour used due to low protein content
minimal water use, coating with fat, minimal handling, or adding acid to REDUCE gluten formation

Fat influence in Pastry Preparation: Flakiness answer: flakiness depends on fat particle size and firmness
-long: puff pastry 
-short: croissants
-mealy: empanadas
COLDNESS MAXIMIZES FLAKINESS

Fat influence in Pastry Preparation: Tenderness answer: fat increases tenderness by INHIBITING gluten development 
fat needs to be thoroughly combined

Liquid function in Pastry Preparation answer: important for hydration and leavening 
-little used as possible: inhibits starch gelatinization
-too much = toughness 
liquid evaporation creates crispy crust

Plain Pastry Mixing Method answer: nonlaminated: cold fat cut into dry ingredients until pea-sized fat particles

Puff Pastry Mixing Method answer: butter block and flour mixture mixed separately and then chilled for lamination

Rolling Plain Pastry answer: bottom crusts: one at a time
top crusts: ventilation needed to let steam release from pie

Baking Pies answer: pyrex glass or dull pans best 
high heat

Composition of Milk answer: 87% water, 13% fat and MSNF

MSNF answer: proteins and lactose

Milk Total Solid answer: fat + SNF

Ice Cream inflated with air? answer: air increases SA for a lighter texture, less creamy, melts faster
-ice cream sold in volume or mass

Colloid Food Foam answer: air bubbles surrounded by fat globules and coated with an emulsified protein layer
-ice cream shrinks overtime due to collapsing films around air bubbles

How do ice crystals form? answer: from lactose
more sugar = bigger crystals = grainy texture

Ice Cream Labeling answer: needs to contain at least 10% milk fat by weight

Milk Fat Percentage in Ice Cream answer: more fat = denser, smoother, richer product
premium ice cream: more fat content

If we are removing milk fat from ice cream, what can we add to products to maintain the texture? answer: stabilizers, egg yolk (lecithin)

Why does the amount of MSNF in ice cream vary? answer: less MSNF needed for ice creams made from bulky flavorings like chocolate or fruit

Ice Cream Flavor answer: temperatures effect flavor: must be boldly flavored BEFORE freezing (-20)

Ice Cream Texture answer: dependent on formation of ice crystals
more nuclei = smaller crystals = smoother
less nuclei = larger crystals = coarser

Ice Cream Overrun answer: the increase in volume from freezing/whipping the liquid mixture 
-economically advantageous

Premium Ice Cream answer: low overrun and high fat

Super-Premium Ice Cream answer: very low overrun and higher fat

Ice Cream Pre Mix answer: tastes like whey protein

Churning and Freezing Ice Cream answer: churned during freezing; promotes formation of small and numerous ice crystal nuclei 
creamier texture
incorporates air

Mixing Methods for Non-Commercial Ice Cream Prep answer: 1. ice cream machine
2. old-fashioned hand cranking 
-churning speed increased near end to facilitate small crystal formation

Low Fat Ice Cream answer: reduced: 25% less than original
light: 50% less than original
low-fat: <3g 
non-fat: <0.5g

Imitation Ice Cream answer: milk fat replaced
-mellorine: veggie fat
-parevine: kosher
-tofutti: soy based

Gelato answer: contains less cream and more milk 
smoother and denser bc less air than cream
churned slower
served at higher temp

Frozen Yogurt answer: made from cultured dairy product with added sweeteners and flavors
-lower fat content
-higher moisture content

Sherbert answer: base is iced sweetened fruit juice/puree
contains <2% milk fat

Sorbet answer: made from fruit and sugar syrup
-contains NO fat, eggs, gelatin, or dairy 
-harder consistency

Water Ices answer: made from sweetened water and fruit juice
-lack MF and MSNF

Storage of Frozen Desserts answer: temperature fluctuations = large ice crystal growth
fresh ice cream has numerous small crystals
temp increases = crystals melt and recrystallize into larger ones 
-stabilizers help

Why are commercial ice cream cones coated with layer of chocolate? answer: damages to ice cream protected from heat shock and temperature abuse

What causes a majority of food borne illnesses? answer: bacteria
-infection 
-intoxication/poisoning 
-toxin mediated infection

Food Infection answer: illness resulting from eating food contaminated with bacteria that grew, replicate, and colonize the host's intestine
- e.coli + salmonella

Food Poisoning/Infection answer: illness resulting from eating food contaminated with bacteria that GREW on food and released toxins 
-food is ALREADY contaminated with toxin

Food Toxin-Mediated Infection answer: illness resulting from eating food contaminated with bacteria that enters the intestine first and THEN starts to produce toxin once in the intestine

Molds answer: produce mycotoxins that cause food intoxication